I would like to study the effect of sea level rise on the coastal cities in the next 60 years.

As a 30 year-old, I have always wanted an ocean-front house as my retirement home in Maryland. However, with sea level rising, I am not sure if buying a property along the coast is a smart idea. In addition, every city has its own geographical landscape and micro-climate which may have an impact on its rate of sea level rise. One city may see water rising at a rate of 1 meter per 30 years, whereas a different city may only have a rate of 1 meter per 60 years. If I have the sea level data at specific locations, I can find out which cities in Maryland I should avoid and which I should consider for my future retirement home.

The Center for Operational Oceanographic Products and Services (CO-OPS) under National Oceanic Services (NOS) in NOAA publishes sea water level data as early as 1877. All active and historic stations where sea water level data are/were collected can be found in https://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/stations.html. This website is scraped, and 72 stations are available in the Chesapeake Bay, MD. CO-OPS also has a public API where I extracted monthly mean sea level data at all Maryland stations (https://opendap.co-ops.nos.noaa.gov/ioos-dif-sos/). In my draft study, only 12 stations with valid JSON data and with more than 100 months of data are considered.

A data frame is then constructed for each of the 12 stations, and their mean sea level (MSL) as a function of time is plotted. See the first plot (https://github.com/elim723/data_incubator/blob/master/predict_sea_level_rise_trend.pdf). Each sub-plot represents a simple time-series analysis for one station. The x-axis is the year and month, whereas the y-axis is the monthly mean sea level in meters. The x-axis runs from the beginning of data-taking til the end of 2071. The observed data from CO-OPS are plotted as black solid line, and the blue vertical dotted line represents the current time (2019/04/30). I found that only a few stations have data that last til 2015, while others do not have data for several decades.

For each station, I run a simple linear regression fit to get the slope and interception, as shown in the text box on the top left corner. Most slopes are fairly small of ~ 1e-4 meters per month, which is expected because sea level rise is a gradual process. The R-squared values of the fitted lines depends on the number of data points - stations with continuous data for the past 20 years have better fits than those without. However, all standard errors are fairly similar across all stations, showing that the line fit is performing fairly well.

The linear regression results are then used to predict the sea level rise in 60 years, assuming I am retiring in 30 years and have a live span of 80 years. The predictions are shown as the red dashed lines. The predicted values are extracted - see the second plot (https://github.com/elim723/data_incubator/blob/master/predict_sea_level_rise_2071.pdf). Each dot represents the predicted mean sea level in 2071 in meters at the 12 cities where the stations are. The error bars are estimated, assuming the standard errors of the corresponding linear regression do not change. This plot shows that Matapeake and Havre De Grace are probably my best bet for my retirement home.

There are a lot more to do on the analysis itself. For example, instead of R-squared and standard error, a more rigorous error estimation using chi2 and p-value may reveal more information and validity of my current results. Further, data at these discrete locations can be interpolated to estimate sea level rise effects for all coastal cities in Maryland. In addition, I don't have to confine my retirement in Maryland - this analysis can be expanded to the entire country given the sea level data from CO-OPS.

For my personal purpose, I would have to do more studies on housing prices along the coast to predict the cost / location / timing of buying a property. However, this sea level study alone can benefit people along the coast. It estimates when people should start considering retreating from the coast. Based on the rate of sea level rise, this study can be expanded to estimate when people currently living in-land would be affected. Although sea level rise is a gradual process, multiple recent scientific studies have suggested an increasing rate of melting polar ice, and the impacts on people's lives due to rising sea level need to be predicted and monitored to reduce global economical cost.
